>> Woodruff: CALIFORNIA CRACKS
DOWN ON WASTING WATER BY
IMPOSING MANDATORY RESTRICTIONS
AND HEAVY FINES, AS THE STATE
BATTLES ONE OF IT'S WORST
DROUGHTS IN DECADES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY,
ISRAEL'S AMBASSADOR TO THE U.S.
DISCUSSES THE POSSIBILITY OF A
GROUND INVASION INTO GAZA.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, A NEW MEXICO
COMMUNITY GRAPPLES WH  TO
DO ABOUT HUNDREDS OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS DETAINED
AND SHELTERED IN THEIR TOWN.
>> WE HAVE THEM HERE.
WE CAN'T JUST NOT TAKE CARE OF
THEM, THAT'S INHUMANE.
>> WE TAKE CARE OF OUR OWN
BEFORE WE GO AND HELP THE
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS?
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S "PBS NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: ISRAEL AGREED LATE
TODAY TO A FIVE-HOUR PAUSE IN
ATTACKS ON GAZA, AFTER A U.N.
APPEAL.
THE HALT, FOR HUMANITARIAN
PURPOSES, WILL BEGIN AT
3 A.M., EASTERN TIME, TOMORROW
MORNING.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT FOLLOWED A DAY
OF STEPPED-UP STRIKES THAT
PUSHED THE PALESTINIAN DEATH
TOLL TO AT LEAST 213.
JONATHAN MILLER OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS FILED THIS
REPORT FROM GAZA.
>> Reporter: TEN PAST FOUR AND
THERE WERE TWO ALMIGHTY
EXPLOSIONS.
ISRAELI SHELLS HAD HIT GROIN
USED BY GAZA CITY'S FISHERMEN.
MANY OF THEIR BOATS HAVE ALREADY
BEEN TARGETED AND SUNK.
PEOPLE EMPTIED OUT ONTO THE
PREVIOUSLY DESERTED STREET AND
RUSHED TO HELP.
IT WAS THEN WE LEARNED THAT A
THIRD SHELL HAD KILLED CHILDREN
MINUTES LATER, JUST DOWN THE
BEACH.
TWO STILL GRABS FROM C.C.T.V.
APPEAR TO SHOW THE FOUR BOYS
PLAYING FOOTBALL.
AND THEN THE SHELL STRIKES.
ISRAEL'S PLEDGE HAD BEEN TO HIT
HAMAS HARD.
AT 1:30 A.M., THREE MISSILES
FROM AN F-16 SLAMMED INTO THE
GAZA CITY HOME OF HAMAS SUPER
STRONGMAN MAHMOOD ZAHAR.
IN ALL, FOUR HAMAS LEADERS'
HOMES WERE DESTROYED OVERNIGHT.
NONE OF THEM WAS KILLED.
THE DEBRIS HERE, NOW A DYSTOPIAN
CHILDREN'S PLAYGROUND.
SHORTLY AFTER DAWN, AN ISRAELI
AIRCRAFT DROPPED LEAFLETS ON
THREE NEIGHBORHOODS, ALL WERE
CLOSE TO THE ISRAELI BORDER.
ONE WAS IN SHAJIA, A DISTRICT IN
THE EAST OF GAZA CITY.
AND HERE IS ONE OF THOSE
LEAFLETS.
THE TRANSLATION FROM THE ARABIC
GOES, "FOR YOUR OWN SAFETY, WE
REQUEST THAT YOU VACATE YOUR
RESIDENCE IMMEDIATELY.
THE ISRAELI DEFENSE FORCE DOES
NOT WISH TO HARM YOU OR YOUR
FAMILY.
THOSE WHO DISREGARD THESE
INSTRUCTIONS ENDANGER THEIR OWN
LIVES AND THOSE OF THEIR
FAMILIES."
HAMAS GOT ON THE LOCAL RADIO
STRAIGHT AWAY AND SAID, "DON'T
BELIEVE IT, DON'T MOVE, IT'S
PROPAGANDA.
THE ISRAELIS SIMPLY WANT YOU TO
MOVE OUT SO THAT THEY CAN MOVE
IN."
THE RESIDENTS OF SHAJA-IR WERE
NOT IMPRESSED.
THIS MAN SAID HE COULDN'T READ.
"WHE N WE GO," THIS MAN
ASKS.
"WE CAN'T GO?
WHERE ARE WE MEANT TO GO?"
>> Reporter: THIS EVENING, THE
FOUR BOYS KILLED JUST DOWN THE
BEACH WERE LAID OUT IN THE ABU
HASIRA MOSQUE.
THE IMAM WAS AGITATED.
HE SAID, "OUR BATTLE WITH THE
ENEMY WILL NEVER END."
>> Ifill: HAMAS" REJECTED A
CEASE-FIRE YESTERDAY.
TODAY, THE MILITANTS FIRED
SEVERAL DOZEN MORE ROCKETS INTO
ISRAEL, BUT CAUSED NO MAJOR
DAMAGE AND NO CASUALTIES.
>> Woodruff: SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD WAS SWORN IN FOR
A THIRD TERM TODAY, EVEN AS A
NOW FOUR-YEAR LONG CIVIL WAR
RAGES ON IN HIS COUNTRY.
ASSAD TOOK THE OATH OF OFFICE
DURING A LARGE CEREMONY AT THE
PRESIDENTIAL PALACE IN DAMASCUS.
HE DECLARED VICTORY OVER THOSE
HE CALLED "TERRORISTS," AND HE
WARNED COUNTRIES WHO'VE BACKED
THE REBELS.
>> ( translated ): SOON WE WILL
SEE THAT THE ARAB, REGIONAL AND
WESTERN STATES THAT SUPPORTED
TERRORISM WILL PAY A HIGH PRICE
AND MANY PEOPLE WILL UNDERSTAND,
LATE, THAT THE BATTLE IN WHICH
SYRIAN PEOPLE IS FIGHTING TO
DEFEND ITS COUNTRY, IS A BATTLE
TO DEFEND MANY OTHER PEOPLE THAT
WILL BE FACING THE SAME
TERRORISM SOONER OR LATER.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. AND OTHER
COUNTRIES HAVE DISMISSED ASSAD'S
RE-ELECTION AS A SHAM.
>> Ifill: IN IRAQ, GOVERNMENT
FORCES PULLED BACK FROM A BID TO
RE-TAKE TIKRIT, AFTER MEETING
HEAVY RESISTANCE FROM SUNNI
INSURGENTS.
THE CITY WAS CAPTURED BY THE
"ISLAMIC STATE" GROUP LAST
MONTH, A STRONGHOLD OF FORMER
DAM HUSSEIN LOYALISTS.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED STATES
IS IMPOSING IT'S TOUGHEST
SANCTIONS YET ON RUSSIA, FOR
SUPPORTING REBELS IN UKRAINE.
THE TREASURY DEPARTMENT
ANNOUNCED NEW PENALTIES THIS
AFTERNOON, TARGETING KEY RUSSIAN
BANKS AS WELL AS ENERGY AND
DEFENSE COMPANIES.
RUSSIA HAS TO UNDERSTAND IT WILL
PAY A PRICE FOR ITS ACTIONS.
>> THESE SANCTIONS ARE
SIGNIFICANT BUT ALSO TARGETED,
DESIGNED TO HAVE THE MAXIMUM
IMPACT ON RUSSIA WHILE LIMITING
SPILLOVER EFFECTS ON AMERICAN
COMPANIES OR OUR ALLIES.
WE ARE TAKING THESE ACTIONS IN
CLOSE CONSULTATION WITH OUR
EUROPEAN ALLIES AND MEETLE IN
BRUSSELS TO AGREE ON THE NEXT
STEPS AND WHAT WE ARE EXPECTING
IS THAT THE RUSSIAN LEADERSHIP
WILL SEE ONCE AGAIN THAT ITS
ACTIONS IN UKRAINE HAVE
CONSEQUENCES.
>> Woodruff: PENTAGON
OFFICIALS REPORTED TODAY MOSCOW
BEEFED UP FORCES ON UKRAINE'S
BORDER TO 12,00 12,000 TROOPS.
>> Ifill: SENATE DEMOCRATS
FAILED IN THEIR BID TODAY TO
REVERSE A SUPREME COURT RULING
ON CONTRACEPTION AND THE HEALTH
CARE LAW.
LAST MONTH'S DECISION SAYS
FAMILY-OWNED COMPANIES AND
OTHERS WITH RELIGIOUS OBJEIO
MAY REFUSE TO COVER SOME FORMS
OF BIRTH CONTROL.
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS
JOUSTED OVER THE BILL BEFORE A
PROCEDURAL VOTE.
>> WHO SHOULD BE IN CHARGE OF A
WOMAN'S HEALTH CARE DECISION?
WOMEN SHOULD CALL THE SHOTS WHEN
IT COMES TO THEIR HEALTH CARE
DECISIONS, NOT THEIR BOSS, NOT
THE GOVERNMENT, NOT ANYONE ELSE,
PERIOD.
>> THE ISSUE BEFORE THIS BODY IS
NOT ABOUT ACCESS TO
CONTRACEPTIVES, DESPITE A WHOLE
LOT OF POLITICKING BY SENATE
DEMOCRATS TO SUGGEST TO THE
CONTRARY.
IN THIS BODY, THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE WHO WOULD DO ANYTHING TO
RESTRICT ACCESS TO
CONTRACEPTIVES TO ANYBODY IS
ZERO.
>> Ifill: THE BILL ULTIMATELY
FELL FOUR VOTES SHORT OF THE 60
NEEDED TO ADVANCE.
REPUBLICANS SAID THEY PLAN TO
INTRODUCE THEIR OWN BILL LATER
THIS WEEK.
>> Woodruff: THE MAN RUNNING THE
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS,
FOR NOW, PAINTED A GRIM PICTURE
TODAY.
ACTING SECRETARY SLOAN GIBSON
SAID VETERANS AND THE PUBLIC
HAVE LOST TRUST IN THE V.A. AMID
A SCANDAL OVER TREATMENT DELAYS
AND FALSIFIED RECORDS.
BUT GIBSON TOLD A SENATE HEARING
THE V.A. HAS A CHANCE TO TURN
THINGS AROUND.
>> WE CAN TURN THESE CHALLENGES
INTO THE GREATEST OPPORTUNITY
FOR IMPROVEMENT IN THE HISTORY
OF THIS DEPARTMENT.
I BELIEVE THAT IN AS LITTLE AS
TWO YEARS THE CONVERSATION CAN
CHANGE, THAT V.A. CAN BE THE
TRUSTED PROVIDER OF CHOICE FOR
HEALTH CARE AND FOR BENEFITS.
>> Woodruff: THE V.A. SAYS IT
ALREADY HAS MADE SOME PROGRESS,
SUCH AS REDUCING THE NUMBER OF
VETERANS WHO'VE WAITED 90 DAYS
OR MORE FOR A MEDICAL
APPOINTMENT.
>> Ifill: AIDS-RELATED DEATHS
WORLDWIDE ARE NOW THE LOWEST
SINCE THEY PEAKED NEARLY A
DECADE AGO.
A UNITED NATIONS AGENCY REPORTS
ONE AND A-HALF MILLION PEOPLE
DIED FROM THE DISEASE LAST YEAR.
35 MILLION WERE INFECTED WITH
H.I.V. VIRTUALLY UNCHANGED OVER
THE LAST TWO YEARS.
U. SAYS WITH GREATER
FUNDING, IT WILL BE POSSIBLE TO
CONTROL THE GLOBAL EPIDEMIC BY
2030 AND, ULTIMATELY, END IT.
>> Woodruff:  A FEDERAL DISTRICT
JUDGE IN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
RULED TODAY THE STATE'S DEATH
PENALTY IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
HE SAID PROLONGED DELAYS IN
CARRYING OUT EXECUTIONS HAVE
MADE THE SYSTEM TOO ARBITRARY, A
VIOLATION OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL
BAR AGAINST CRUEL AND UNUSUAL
PUNISHMENT.
THE RULING CAME IN THE CASE OF A
MAN CONDEMNED IN 1994, AND STILL
ON DEATH ROW.
>> Ifill: GENERAL MOTORS IS
FACING YET MORE SCRUTINY ABOUT
IT'S HANDLING OF AN IGNITION
SWITCH DEFECT THAT TRIGGERED
MASS RECALLS.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED
TODAY THAT G.M. KEPT QUIET FOR
YEARS AS REGULATORS ASKED ABOUT
THE POTENTIAL CAUSES OF FATAL
CRASHES.
THE IGNITION PROBLEM HAS BEEN
LINKED TO AT LEAST 13 DEATHS.
>> Woodruff: B.M.W. ANNOUNCED
THAT IT'S RECALLING
1.6 MILLION OF IT'S CARS
WORLDWIDE FOR POSSIBLY DEFECTIVE
AIR BAGS.
MORE THAN HALF OF THOSE ARE IN
THE U.S. THEY INCLUDE "THREE-
SERIES" CARS FROM MODEL YEARS
2000 TO 2006.
A NUMBER OF OTHER AUTO MAKERS
HAVE ISSUED SIMILAR RECALLS FOR
AIR BAGS, ALL MADE BY THE SAME
JAPANESE FIRM, TAKATA
CORPORATION.
>> Ifill: ON WALL STREET TODAY,
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 77 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,138.
THE NASDAQ ROSE NINE POINTS TO
CLOSE NEAR 4,426.
THE S-&-P 500 ADDED EIGHT TO
FINISH AT 1,981.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
CALIFORNIA TAKES EMERGENCY
MEASURES TO TACKLE A WORSENING
DROUGHT;
THE ISRAELI AMBASSADOR ON THE
POSSIBILITY OF A GROUND INVASION
IN GAZA;
A TOWN DIVIDED OVER GIVING
SHELTER TO IMMIGRANTS WHO AWAIT
DEPORTATION;
ENFORCING SAFETY MEASURES AT
FEDERAL LABORATORIES TO PREVENT
BIO-TERROR THREATS;
AND THE PEACE CORPS, IN SEARCH
OF A NEW GENERATION OF
VOLUNTEERS.
>> Ifill: CALIFORNIA OFFICIALS
ARE PUTTING MANDATORY
RESTRICTIONS ON WATER USE IN
PLACE, AS A RESULT OF THAT
STATE'S ONGOING DROUGHT.
SEVERAL WESTERN STATES,
INCLUDING OREGON, NEVADA,
ARIZONA AND NEW MEXICO, HAVE
LARGE REGIONS SUFFERING A SEVERE
TO EXTREME DROUGHT.
BUT CALIFORNIA'S PROBLEM HAS
LASTED LONGER THAN MOST, AND NOW
THE STATE SAYS IT'S TIME TO RAMP
UP CONSERVATION.
>> Woodruff: DRIED-UP LAKE BEDS
AND WATER SHORTAGES HAVE BECOME
DEPRESSINGLY FAMILIAR SIGHTS
ACROSS CALIFORNIA, AND STATE
WATER REGULATORS MOVED TUESDAY
TO IMPOSE NEW CONSERVATION
RULES.
STATE WATER BOARD CHAIR FELICIA
MARCUS.
>> WE'RE FOCUSING ON OUTDOOR
IRRIGATION BECAUSE THAT'S A
PLACE WHERE PEOPLE TEND TO, EVEN
WITHOUT REALIZING IT, THEY OVER-
WATER.
IT REALLY BEHOOVES ALL OF US TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO USE THE WATER
THAT WE DO HAVE AS WISELY AS WE
CAN.
>> Woodruff: STARTING AUGUST
FIRST, THE NEW RULES COULD MEAN
DAILY FINES OF UP TO $500 FOR
PEOPLE WHO WASTE WATER ON LAWNS
AND CAR WASHING.
CALIFORNIA IS NOW IN THE THIRD
YEAR OF IT'S WORST DROUGHT SINCE
THE 1970'S.
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN DECLARED A
DROUGHT EMERGENCY IN JANUARY,
AND TEMPORARILY ROLLED BACK
PROTECTIONS FOR ENDANGERED FISH
TO ALLOW PUMPING FROM THE SAN
JOAQUIN-SACRAMENTO RIVER DELTA.
BROWN ALSO CALLED FOR A
VOLUNTARY 20% REDUCTION IN WATER
USE, BUT A STATE SURVEY SHOWS
CONSUMPTION ACTUALLY ROSE BY ONE
PERCENT IN MAY.
JAY LUND, AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA AT DAVIS, HAS STUDIED
THE DROUGHT.
HE SAYS THE STATE'S RESIDENTS
HAVE TO ADJUST.
>> FROM ALL THE CLIMATE CHANGE
STUDIES THAT WE'VE DONE, WE
DON'T SEE CATASTROPHE IF WE
MANAGE IT WELL, BUT WE DO SEE
INCONVENIENCE AND WE DO SEE
COSTS.
>> Woodruff: A LARGE PART OF
THOSE COSTS COME IN THE STATE'S
AGRICULTURE SECTOR THAT PROVIDES
FOOD FOR MUCH OF THE UNITED
STATES.
FARMERS IN THE SAN JOAQUIN
VALLEY ALREADY FACED REDUCED
WATER FLOWS, AND THEY ARE
WORRIED.
>> I DON'T KNOW, IF THIS DROUGHT
CONTINUES WE'RE IN TROUBLE,
SERIOUS TROUBLE.
EVEN WHEN WE'RE DRILLING THESE
WELLS, WE'RE WATCHING THE
PRODUCTION.
MOST OF THE WELLS THAT WE HAVE
ARE DOWN 30% FROM A YEAR AGO AND
WE'RE WATCHING THEM DROP BY THE
WEEK.
>> Woodruff: THE U.C. DAVIS
REPORT WARNS THE DROUGHT WILL
COST CALIFORNIA $2.2 BILLION
THIS YEAR, AND THE LOSS OF MORE
THAN 17,000 JOBS.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THE
RATIONALE FOR THEM AND THEIR
LIKELY IMPACT, I'M JOINED BY
TIMOTHY QUINN, THE DIRECTOR OF
THE ASSOCIATION OF CALIFORNIA
WATER AGENCIES. HIS MEMBERS WILL
HAVE TO ENFORCE THE CHANGES.
AND CRAIG MILLER, THE SCIENCE
EDITOR AT SAN FRANCISCO'S
K.Q.E.D. PUBLIC MEDIA.
AND WE WELCOME YOU BOTH.
TO YOU FIRST, TIMOTHY QUINN, WHY
WERE THESE REGULATIONS NECESSARY
RIGHT NOW, AND IF THE SITUATION
IS SO SERIOUS, WHY THE
DISCRETION TO INDIVIDUAL
AGENCIES ON HOW AND WHETHER TO
ENFORCE THEM?
>> WELL, THAT IS NECESSARY
BECAUSE WE'RE GOING THROUGH AN
EXTRAORDINARY DROUGHT EXPERIENCE
IN CALIFORNIA.
LAST YEAR WAS THE DRYEST YEAR ON
RECORD, THIS YEAR IS THE THIRD
DRYEST.
THE DEMAND IS UP, STORAGE IS
DOWN, SO OUR MEMBER AGENCIES
BELIEVE THE ACTION IS NECESSARY
NOW.
FRANKLY,ETH NOT TOO LATE.
THE SERIOUSNESS OF THIS DROUGHT
JUST BECAME APPARENT IN THE LAST
FEW MONTHS.
I MEAN, IN JANUARY, FEBRUARY,
MARCH, WE WERE DRY AS A BONE.
WE STARTED TO REALIZE WE HAD TO
TAKE THIS SERIOUSLY.
IT TAKES TIME, OF COURSE, FOR
THE PUBLIC AND OTHERS TO MOVE UP
THE LEARNING CURVE.
I THINK THE ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE
CONTROL BOARD, OUR WATER COMP IN
CALIFORNIA, THEY'RE SAYING TAKE
THIS SERIOUS FOR THE EMERGENCY
THAT IT IS AND THAT'S WHAT WE'LL
BE DOING.
>> Woodruff: BRIEFLY REMIND US
WHAT PEOPLE ARE ASKED TO DO.
NO WATER RUNOFF WHEN YOU'RE
WATERING THE LAWN, DON'T WATER
DRIVEWAYS, DON'T USE EXCESS
WATER ON THE CARS.
IT'S ALL OUTDOOR USE?
>> THE FOCUS IS USE BUT THE
STATE IS ORDERING EVERY WATER
AGENCY THAT SERVES MORE THAN
3,000 CONNECTIONS IN CALIFORNIA
TO GO TO THE MAPPED TORE
CONNECTIONS OF THE DROUGHT
CONTINGENCY PLANS.
IT'S FOCUSED ON THE OUTDOORS BUT
CALIFORNIA IS REALIZING THIS IS
AN EMERGENCY SITUATION AND WILL
START SAVING OUTDOORS AND
INDOORS.
MAYBE SHOWERS HAVE BEEN THE
ORDER OF THE DAY.
THEY HAVE BEEN IN MY HOUSE SINCE
JANUARY.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE FLUSHING
AS OFTEN AND THE LAWN WILL BE
BROWN AND IT WILL BE TOUGH TILL
IT'S OVER.
>> Woodruff: CRAIG MILLER, YOU
HAVE BEEN REPORTING TON WATER
SITUATION FOR A LONG TIME.
HOW SERIOUSLY DO CALIFORNIANS
TAKE THIS PROBLEM?
>> IT'S KIND OF HARD TO TELL.
SOME POLLING WAS DONE IN MAY ON
THAT VERY POINT AND MOST
CALIFORNIANS AT THAT TIME, ABOUT
60%, I BELIEVE, SAID THEY
THOUGHT THE DROUGHT WAS PRETTY
SERIOUS WHERE THEY WERE, AND
MOST OF THEM ALSO SAID THAT THEY
WERE ALREADY TAKING ACTIONS TO
SAVE WATER.
AS WE'VE HEARD, THE GOVERNOR IS
ASKING FOR 20% WATER REDUCTION
ACROSS THE BOARD AND HE'S NOT
GETTING CLOSE TO IT.
IN SOME PARTS OF THE STATE,
WATER USE IS ACTUALLY UP THIS
YEAR.
I THINK THAT'S PROBABLY ONE OF
THE REASONS AT THE STATE LEVEL
THEY STARTED THINKING IT WAS
TIME TO TAKE THE BULL BY THE
HORNS.
>> Woodruff: YOU WERE TELLING
US EARLIER TODAY, CRAIG MILLER,
THAT IN OBSERVING WHAT PEOPLE
ARE DOING AROUND THE STATE, YOU
THINK PEOPLE ARE, THOUGH, TAKING
PRECAUTIONS THEY DIDN'T USED TO
OR USING WATER IN A SOMEWHAT
DIFFERENT WAY.
>> WELL, EVERYTHING'S RELATIVE.
YOU KNOW, IF YOU LOOK AT THE PER
CAPITA WATER CONSUMPTION AROUND
CALIFORNIA, IT'S ALL OVER THE
MAP, LITERALLY AND FIGURATIVELY.
ANYWHERE FROM 50 GALLONS A DAY
TO THREE, FOUR TIMES THAT,
DEPENDING IN LARGE PART ON THE
SIZE OF LAWNS PEOPLE HAVE AND
WHAT THEY'RE DOING WITH THEM.
BUT YOU ALSO HAVE AN INCREASED
NUMBER OFO HIGH -- AN INCREASED
NUMBER OF HIGH-DENSITY HOUSING
IN URBAN AREAS.
A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T HAVE LAWNS
ANMORE AND THINGS ARE GENERALLY
MORE EFFICIENT THAN THEY WERE.
IF YOU GO BACK TO THE LAST
SERIOUS DROUGHT IN THE MID
'70s, PEOPLE WERE TOLD TO PUT
A BRICK OR GALLON WATER JUG IN
THE TANK TO REDUCE THE FLUSH.
WELL, TODAY, MOST TOILETS
ALREADY USE THE LOWER AMOUNT OF
WATER PER FLUSH.
SO THINGS HAVE ALREADY BECOME
MORE EFFICIENT.
THE LESS WATER PEOPLE ARE USING,
THE HARDER ITS TO SQUEEZE
SAVINGS OUT OF THEM.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU EXPECT
THE LOCAL WATER AGENCIES WILL
ENFORCE THIS LEGISLATION IN WILL
THEY GO AROUND THE NEIGHBORHOODS
AND SEE WHAT PEOPLE ARE DOING?
>> THAT WILL HAPPEN.
ALL AGENCIES THAT DELIVER WATER
IN CALIFORNIA HAVE DROUGHT
CONTINGENCY PLANS IN PLACE.
THEY DON'T DREAM THEM UP.
THEY GO FROM VOLUNTARY MEASURES,
TO STRONGER, TO MANDATORY
MEASURES.
THE PLANS ARE IN PLACE.
THERE HAVE BEEN TWO DROUGHTS
BEFORE, SO THEY WILL GO OUT AND
DO THOSE THINGS.
IT'S NOT EASY.
THERE ARE A LOT OF ARGUMENTS.
YOU GET COMPLAINTS FROM THE
CUSTOMERS.
THEY WILL IMPLEMENT PLANS THEY
ALREADY HAVE IN PLACE, BY AND
LARGE.
IF YOU DON'T HAVE A PLAN IN
PLACE, YOU WILL BE REQUIRED TO
GET ONE AND TAKE SPECIFIC
ACTIONS.
TYPICALLY, WE FIND A HOME OWNER
WHOSE GRASS WITH TOO GREEN OR
THE DRIVEWAY IS WET, YOU GIVE
THEM A WARNING THAT MAY BE
FOLLOWED BY ANOTHER WARNING AND
A SMALL FINE THAT ACTUALLY GET
BIG.
THE ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE STATE
YESTERDAY AUTHORIZES FINES UP TO
$500 A DAY, WHICH WILL GET WATER
USERS' ATTENTION, ALTHOUGH I
PREDICT YOU WON'T SEE THAT MANY
FINES.
I PREDICT CALIFORNIANS WILL
RESPOND.
THIS WILL CONVINCE THEM WE HAVE
A TRUE EMERGENCY, THEY NEED TO
CHANGE BEHAVIOR, DO
EXTRAORDINARY THINGS THAT GO
BEYOND EFFICIENCY, THEY'VE
ALWAYS RESPONDED IN THE PAST AND
I THINK THEY WILL THIS YEAR.
>> Reporter: WHAT'S YOUR SENSE
OF HOW PEOPLE WILL RESPOND,
CRAIG MILLER?
ARE THEY GOING TO GO AHEAD AND
COMPLY?
>> I THINK THE ENFORCEMENT IS A
LITTLE MURKY, JUDY.
EVEN IN THE RELEASE THAT CAME
OUT FROM THE STATE WATER BOARD,
THEY SAID SOMETHING ABOUTOW
LOCAL DISTRICTS WOULD BE ALLOWED
TO ASK COURTS TO IMPOSE FINES.
THE ACTUAL LINKAGE BETWEEN THE
REGULATION THEY'VE PUT OUT AND
THE FINES THEMSELVES IS PRETTY
LOOSE.
I AGREE WITH TIM, I DON'T THINK
WE'LL ACTUALLY SEE MUCH OF THAT
HAPPENING.
DISTRICTS ARE REACTING
DIFFERENTLY.
AS TIM WILL TELL YOU, THERE'S
OVER 400 WATER DISTRICTS AND
AGENCIES AROUND CALIFORNIA AND
THEY'RE ALL TAKING THIS WITH
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF SERIOUSNESS.
SOME SAID THEY WILL RESPOND VERY
AGGRESSIVELY, LIKE
SAN FRANCISCO, FOR EXAMPLE, AND
OTHERS ARE SAYING IT'S GOING TO
BE PRETTY MUCH WHAT THEY HAVE
BEEN DOING RIGHT ALONG.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, TIMOTHY
QUINN, A MIXED PICTURE IN TERMS
OF ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE
AROUND THE STATE?
IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE LOOKING AT?
>> WELL, WITH HUNDREDS OF WATER
AGENCIES, THERE'S ALWAYS GOING
TO BE A MIX.
LET ME TELL YOU, IT WILL LOOK
MORE THE RESULT OF WHAT THE
BOARD HAS DONE.
THE STATE HAS A LOT OF POWER.
THE GOVERNOR DECLARED EMERGENCY
POWERS WHICH ARE EXTRAORDINARY
IN ALL STATES INCLUDING
CALIFORNIA.
WATER AGENCIES AROUND THE STATE
WILL START BEHAVING MORE LIKE
EACH OTHER.
CONSUMERS WILL RESPOND TO A
CRISIS CONDITION.
THEY JUST HAVEN'T QUITE GOTTEN
THIS DROUGHT BEFORE NOW.
THIS WILL HELP THEM GET THIS
DROUGHT.
>> Woodruff: TIMOTHY QUINN
WITH THE ASSOCIATION OF
CALIFORNIA WATER AGENCIES, CRAIG
MILLER WITH KQED, WE THANK YOU
BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW TO OUR SERIES OF
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THE ONGOING
TURMOIL IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
OUR CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
HAS SPOKEN THIS WEEK WITH THE
FORMER U.S. ENVOY FOR ISRAELI-
PALESTINIAN PEACE AND AN ANALYST
WITH CLOSE CONNECTIONS TO HAMAS.
EARLIER TODAY, SHE SAT DOWN WITH
ISRAEL'S AMBASSADOR TO THE
UNITED STATES, RON DERMER.
THE INTERVIEW TOOK PLACE BEFORE
THE ISRAELI MILITARY AGREED TO A
U.N. BROKERED "PAUSE" IN THE
FIGHTING.
>> Warner: AMBASSADOR DERMER,
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Warner: TODAY THE ACADEMY
CALLED UP 8,000 RESERVIST
BRINGING THE NUMBER TO 50,000.
AFTER WHAT HAPPENED YESTERDAY IS
A GROUND INVASION OF GAZA
IMMINENT?
>> THE SECURITY CABINET MET
EARLY THAT MORNING, ACCEPTED THE
CEASE FIRE PROPOSAL FROM EGYPT.
A CEASE-FIRE PROPOSAL THAT WAS
ACCEPTED BY THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY AND THE ARAB LEAGUE.
HAMAS WOULDN'T AGREE TO THAT,
FORCED ISRAEL INTO CONTINUED
OPERATIONS AND LAST NIGHT THE
SECURITY CABINET MET AND HAS
GIVEN NOW THE AUTHORITY TO THE
PRIME MINISTER TO TAKE THE
ACTION HE NEEDS TO TAKE IN ORDER
TO PROTECT THE ISRAELI PEOPLE,
INCLUDING ANY ACTION HE NEEDS
WHETHER MILITARY OR DIPLOMATIC,
AND I THINK THE 8,000 RESERVISTS
THAT WERE CALLED UP MAKES SURE
THAT THE PRIME MINISTER HAS ALL
THE TOOLS AT HIS DISPOSAL TO
PROTECT THE ISRAELI PEOPLE.
>> Warner: YOUR FOREIGN
MINISTER SEEMS TO HAVE REACHED A
CONCLUSION.
HE SAID THE SECURITY OF THE
CITIZENS OF ISRAEL CANNOT BE
INSURED WITHOUT A GROUND
INVASION.
HE'S BEEN THE PRIME MINISTER A
VERY LONG TIME.
DOES HE SHARE THAT VIEW?
>> I KNOW THE PRIME MINISTER
WILL DO WHAT'S NECESSARY TO
PROTECT THE ISRAELI PEOPLE.
THERE WERE DEBATES AND DISPUTES
WITHIN ISRAELI'S SECURITY
CABINET.
THE MAJORITY OF THE ISRAELI
PEOPLE WERE AGAINST THE CEASE
FIRE.
ABOUT 2 TO 1 WERE AGAINST THE
CEASE FIRE.
NOT BECAUSE THEY WANT TO END THE
ATTACKS, BUT BECAUSE THEY WT
TO BE SURE THE ATTACKS DON'T END
JUST FOR A DAY OR A MONTH OR SIX
MONTHS, THAT WE HAVE SOME
PERMANENT RESOLUTION TO THIS
PROBLEM.
>> Warner: HOW INTENSE IS THE
POLITICAL PRESSURE ON THE PRIME
MINISTER TO DO SOMETHING MORE
THAN JUST GET BACK TO THE STATUS
QUO HERE, TO ACTUALLY "CLEAN OUT
HAMAS FROM GAZA"?
>> I THINK IT'S PRETTY STRONG
AND THE BEST WAY TO UNDERSTAND
IT IS IMAGINE YOU HAD
200 MILLION AMERICANS IN BOMB
SHELTERS, YOU HAD 1,000 ROCKETS
FIRED AT YOU BY A TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION IN TERRITORY AND
THE CEASE FIRE PROPOSAL.
DO YOU THINK THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
WOULD SUPPORT IT OR WOULD THEY
WANT THEIR GOVERNMENT AND
MILITARY TO TAKE VERY STRONG
ACTION, EVEN STRONGER ACTION TO
BRING IT TO AN END?
IT'S IMPORTANT TO APPRECIATE HOW
MUCH RESTRAINT THE PRIME
MINISTER OF ISRAEL HAS SHOWN IN
DEALING WITH THIS AND PROSECUTOR
THIS WAR AGAINST HAMAS IN A
CALIBRATED AND MEASURED WAY.
DOESN'T MEAN WE'RE PERFECT.
UNFORTUNATELY, ANYTIME YOU HAVE
A WAR, EVEN IF YOU TAKE THE MOST
LEGITIMATE ACTIONS TO DEFEND
YOURSELF, INNOCENTS CAN BE PUT
INTO HARM'S WAY.
>> Warner: HUMAN RIGHTS
FIGURES SAY AS OF MONDAY EVEN
THOUGH ISRAEL SAYS IT'S
TARGETING HAMAS LEADERS THAT
THREE-FORTS OF THE PEOPLE --
THREE-QUARTERS OF THE PEOPLE
KILLED ARE CIVILIANS.
>> I DON'T THINK THAT'S TRUE.
WHEN THE OPERATION COMES TO AN
END, I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
REALIZE HAMAS USES HUMAN
SHIEWLDZ AND ARE DOING
EVERYTHING THEY CAN TO PUT THE
PALESTINIAN POPULATION IN GAZA
INTO HARM'S WAY.
ISRAEL IS DOING EVERYTHING IT
CAN, WHETHER DROPPING FLYERS,
CALLING PEOPLE, SENDING TEXT
MESSAGES, TAKING ALL SORTS OF
ACTIONS TO GET THE PALESTINIANS
OUT OF HARM'S WAY.
>> Warner: IF THERE'S
INTERNATIONAL CRITICISM THAT THE
USE OF FORCE IS
DISPROPORTIONATE, ISRAEL REJECTS
THAT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I COMPLETELY REJECT IT AND I'LL
TELL YOU WHY.
I THINK PART OF THAT CRITICISM
IS NOT UNDERSTANDING THE RULES
OF WAR.
PEOPLE SAY IT'S DISPROPORTIONATE
BECAUSE THEY DO ESSENTIALLY A
BODY BAG COUNT ON EACH SIDE.
I SAY, LOOK, 200 PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN KILLED ON THE PALESTINIAN
SIDE AND ONLY ONE ISRAELI AT
THIS POINT IS KILLED.
IF MORE ISRAELIS WERE TO DIE THE
AIOWOULD BECOME
PROPORTIONATE.
PROPORTIONALITY HAS NOTHING TO
DO.
22 AS MANY GERMANS DIED IN WORLD
WAR II AS AMERICANS.
DIDN'T MEAN AMERICANS' FORCE WAS
DISPROPORTIONATE OR THE RM
WERE RIGHT.
ALWAYS MAKE A DISTINCTION
BETWEEN COMBATANTS AND
NON-COMBATTED BTS.
ISRAEL DOES THAT ALL THE TIME.
WE DO NOT DELIBERATELY TARGET
PALESTINIANS.
THEY'RE TARGETING OURS, WE DON'T
TARGET THEIRS.
>> Warner: TALK ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF A GROUND
INVASION.
IF THERE WERE TO BE ONE, WHAT
WOULD BE THE OBJECTIVES?
ARE WE TALKING ABOUT A TARGET OF
RAIDS AIMED AT COMMAND AND
CONTROL BUNKERS OF MILITANTS OR
THINKING ABOUT TAKING OVER IN
GAZA?
>> ISRAEL DOESN'T HAVE A
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE TO RECONQUER
GAZA.
WE DID NOT HAVE THAT OBJECTIVE A
YEAR AND A HALF AGO.
THE LAST TIME WE WERE IN A
CONFRONTATION WENT ON FOR EIGHT
DAYS, THE CEASE FIRE ACHIEVED
BEFORE THE GROUND OPERATION.
WE DON'T HAVE THAT OBJECTIVE
NOW.
THE PRIME MINISTER HAS BEEN
CLEAR ABOUT WHAT ISRAEL'S
OBJECTIVE IS, A SUSTAINED PERIOD
OF QUIET.
WE'RE DOING THAT BY DEGRADING
CAPABILITIES OF HAMAS IN GAZA
AND THE PRIME MINISTER WILL
ACHIEVE THAT WHETHER MILITARILY
OR DIPLOMATICALLY.
YOU ALWAYS PREFER DIPLOMATIC
OUTCOMES BUT WE HAVE TO ACHIEVE
THE SUSTAINED PEACE OF ISRAEL.
>> Warner: CAN THAT BE
ACHIEVED WITH A LIMITED GROUND
OPERATION?
>> DON'T KNOW.
REMAINS T TO BE SEEN.
THE QUESTION IS WHAT KIND OF
FORCE TO BE BROUGHT TO BEAR ON
HAMAS.
>> Warner: MAHMOUD ABBAS IS IN
CAIRO SPEAKING WITH PRESIDENT
SISI TODAY.
SECRETARY KERRY'S ASKED FOR A
LITTLE MORE TIME TO LET THIS
PROPOSAL TO PLAY OUT.
HOW MUCH TIME IS ISRAEL PREPARED
TO GIVE THIS PROCESS TIME TO
POSSIBLY WORK?
>> WELL, ISRAEL ALREADY AGREEDO
THE CEASE FIRE.
SO NOW WE HAVE ROCKETS AND WE
HAVE TO DEFEND OURSELVES.
OBVIOUSLY, IF ALL OF A SUDDEN
HAMAS CHANGES ITS MIND I'M SURE
THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT WOULD
TAKE IT SERIOUSLY BECAUSE WE
AGREED TO THE PROPOSAL.
THERE'S NO REASON YOU WOULD WANT
TO AGREE TO THE PROPOSAL AGAIN
BUT WE HAVE TO HAVE A SUSTAINED
PERIOD OF QUIET FOR ISRAEL.
WE APPRECIATE THE EFFORTS OF
EVERYBODY AND STRONG STATEMENTS
MADE BY PRESIDENT OBAMA, BY
SECRETARY KERRY, ALL THE
DIPLOMATIC PRESSURERS BROUGHT TO
BEAR ON HAMAS HOPEFULLY WILL
LEAD TO HAMAS TO RECONSIDER ITS
POSITION AND AGREE TO A
CEASE-FIRE.
>> Warner: OTHERS HAVE TOLD US
THAT ALL HAMAS WANTS TO ACCEPT
THE CEASE FIRE IS A RE-RELEASE
OF THE PRISONERS THEY WON BACK
IN THE PRISONER EXCHANGE AND
WERE RECAPTURED AND, TWO, AN
OPENING OF SOME OF THE CROSSINGS
BETWEEN EGYPT AND GAZA.
COULD ISRAEL ACCEPT THOSE?
>> WE'RE NOT GOING TO NEGOTIATE
FOR A CEASE-FIRE EVEN ON YOUR
VERY PRESTIGIOUS SHOW.
THE EGYPTIANS PUT A PROPOSAL ON
THE TABLE WITH FOUR POINTS.
ISRAEL'S SECURITY CABINET AGREED
TO IT.
AS I SAID, WASN'T AS SIMPLE FOR
THE PRIME MINISTER TO MAKE THAT
DECISION.
IT WAS AN ACT OF TREMENDOUS
LEADERSHIP ON HIS PART.
HE HADO ACTUALLY FIRE DEPUTY
DEFENSE MINISTER IN THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT FOR THE CRITICISM HE
FACED FROM ONE OF HIS OWN
MEMBERS OF HIS GOVERNMENT FOR
THE DECISION TO AGREE TO THE
CEASE FIRE.
>> Warner: ARE YOU SAYING THE
ISRAELI CABINET AGREED TO THE
PROPOSAL TO RELEASE THE
PRISONERS?
>> NO.
THE EGYPTIAN CEASE FIRE WAS ON
THE TABLE AND I ASSUME REMAINS
THERE AND HOPEFULLY HAMAS WILL
RECONSIDER FOR THE SAKE OF
BATTLESSIAN POPULATION IN GAZA.
NOW WE HAVE A SITUATION WHERE
FROM THE NORTHERN PART OF GAZA,
THOUSANDS OF PALESTINIANS ARE
HAVING TO LEAVE THEIR HOMES
BECAUSE  ISRAEL IS GOING TO HAVE
TO INTENSIFY MILITARY OPERATIONS
TO BRING THIS ROCKET FIRE TO AN
END.
SO HOPEFULLY WE CAN REACH A GOOD
CONCLUSION AS QUICKLY AS
POSSIBLE WITH LIMITED CASUALTIES
ON BOTH SIDES.
>> Warner: AMBASSADOR DERMER,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AS WE SAID, THAT
INTERVIEW WAS RECORDED BEFORE
THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED
IT HAD AGREED TO A FIVE-HOUR
HUMANITARIAN PAUSE IN THE
BOMBING TOMORROW.
BUT AN ISRAELI OFFICIAL TOLD
MARGARET LATE TODAY THAT IF
HAMAS CONTINUES FIRING ROCKETS
DURING THE PAUSE, QUOTE, "WE'LL
HAVE TO REACT AND DEFEND
OURSELVES."
ON THE OTHER HAND, HE SAID, IF
HAMAS DOES OBSERVE THE PAUSE IT
COULD BECOME THE BASIS FOR A
TRUE CEASE FIRE.
TOMORROW MARGARET WILL INTERVIEW
THE PALESTINE LIBERATION
ORGANIZATION'S AMBASSADOR TO THE
U.S., MAEN RASHID AREIKAT.
YOU CAN SEE ALL OF HER
INTERVIEWS IN THIS SERIES, ON
OUR WORLD PAGE.
>> Ifill: NEXT, THE IMMIGRATION
DIVIDE.
A NEW WASHINGTON POST/ABC NEWS
POLL SHOWS A MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS AGREE ON ONE ASPECT OF
THE DEBATE, THEY DON'T LIKE HOW
POLITICIANS ARE HANDLING THE
SITUATION:
58% DISAPPROVE OF WHAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA HAS BEEN DOING AND 66%
DISAPPROVE OF HOW HOUSE
REPUBLICANS HAVE HANDLED IT.
WE TAKE A LOOK NOW AT A SMALL
SOUTHWESTERN CITY ON THE
FRONTLINES OF THE CRISIS.
SINCE JUNE 27, IT'S BECOME A
TEMPORARY HOME FOR SOME OF THE
THOUSANDS OF FAMILIES WHO HAVE
ENTERED THE U.S. ILLEGALLY.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KATHLEEN
MCCLEERY REPORTS.
>> Reporter: THE HOT, DRY, DUSTY
TOWN OF ARTESIA SITS ABOUT 70
MILES NORTH OF THE MEXICO BORDER
IN SOUTHEASTERN NEW MEXICO.
IT'S RICH IN OIL AND GAS AND
HOME TO RANCHES AND FARMLAND.
MOST PEOPLE IN THIS RED PART OF
A BLUE STATE ARE CONSERVATIVE.
PHILLIP BURCH HAS BEEN MAYOR FOR
SEVEN YEARS.
>> BY AND LARGE, THE COMMUNITY
WOULD PREFER THIS INSTALLATION
NOT BE HERE, BECAUSE WE VIEW THE
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING
CENTER AS A PLACE TO TRAIN LAW
ENFORCEMENT PEOPLE, AND WE JUST
DON'T FEEL THAT IT'S APPROPRIATE
TO HAVE IT CHANGE TO A DETENTION
CENTER.
>> Reporter: THE FEDERAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT TRAINING CENTER IS
RUN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY.
IN NO SMALL IRONY, AS THE MAYOR
SAID, IT TRAINS BORDER PATROL
AGENTS.
NOW, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS
CONVERTED THREE FORMER BARRACKS
TO HOUSE 672 MOTHERS AND
CHILDREN UNDER AGE 17.
EIGHT FOOT FENCES KEEP THEM
HIDDEN FROM THE PEOPLE OF
ARTESIA.
THE WOMEN AND CHILDREN COME FROM
CENTRAL AMERICA'S NORTHERN
TRIANGLE, HONDURAS, GUATEMALA
AND EL SALVADOR.
THEY CROSSED FROM MEXICO INTO
TEXAS, WERE CAPTURED BY THE
BORDER PATROL AND BUSSED HERE.
OFFICIALS SAY MOST WILL BE SENT
HOME.
LAST WEEK, HOMELAND SECURITY
OFFICIALS TOOK REPORTERS ON A
SUPERVISED TOUR OF SOME
UNOCCUPIED ROOMS.
THIS FACILITY IS SPANKING CLEAN,
AIR CONDITIONED AND COMFORTABLY
EQUIPPED AND WILL HELP RELIEVE
THE OVERCROWDING AT THE BORDER.
FOUR BUNK BEDS WITH NEW LINENS
LINE THE WALLS OF BEDROOMS.
THERE ARE FLAT SCREEN
TELEVISIONS, PLAYROOMS STOCKED
WITH TOYS, AND CLINICS WITH
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.
RESIDENTS GET HOUSEKEEPING,
LAUNDRY SERVICES, NEW CLOTHING
AND THREE MEALS A DAY.
FEDERAL AUTHORITIES WON'T SAY
HOW MUCH MONEY HAS BEEN SPENT,
OR HOW MANY STAFF THEY'VE HIRED
HERE.
OUTSIDE A LOCAL BREW PUB IN
TOWN, LONGTIME RESIDENT JOANN
GRIGGS QUESTIONED THE FEDERAL
SPENDING.
>> WE'RE GIVING IT AWAY TO
PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT EVEN CITIZENS
OF THE U.S. MAINLY, WE ARE
SUPPORTING THEM, WE ARE FEEDING
THEM, BOARDING THEM, EDUCATING
THEM AND PROBAGOING TO
DOCTOR THEM, AND IT'S OUR TAX
DOLLARS THAT'S DOING IT, AND IT
REALLY UPSETS ME.
>> Reporter: AT A VETERANS
MEMORIAL, WE FOUND VIETNAM VET
KEN BOLES.
>> WE'VE GOT PEOPLE IN THIS
COUNTRY THAT NEED HOUSING, WE'VE
GOT HOMELESS VETS RUNNING
AROUND, AND KIDS THAT ARE
STARVING AND THINGS LIKE THAT,
THEY NEED TO CLEAN THEIR OWN
YARD BEFORE THEY GO TO SOMEBODY
ELSE'S PLACE.
AND AT A CAR WASH FOR A HIGH
SCHOOL FAST PITCH SOFTBALL TEAM,
NURSE BECKY PEREZ HAD SIMILAR
THOUGHTS.
>> I'M LIKE, TAKE CARE OF OUR
OWN BEFORE WE GO AND HELP THE
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS.
>> Reporter: NOT EVERYONE IN
TOWN HELD THAT VIEW.
THE IMMIGRANTS ARE FLEEING GANG
VIOLENCE, DRUG LORDS AND
POVERTY, CREATING A HUMAN RIGHTS
ISSUE THAT AMERICANS HAVE TO PAY
FOR SAID PAMELA NORDSTROM AT THE
JAHVA HOUSE COFFEE SHOP.
>> I DON'T THINK WE CAN AFFORD
NOT TO.
YOU HAVE THEM HERE, YOU CAN'T
NOT JUST TAKE CARE OF THEM,
THAT'S INHUMANE.
WE PROVIDE FOR LOST ANIMALS, WE
HAVE TO AT LEAST PROVIDE THE
BASIC CARE.
>> Reporter: SOME IN ARTESIA
THINK THE COMFORTABLE LIVING
QUARTERS MAY ACTUALLY ENCOURAGE
THOSE DEPORTED TO VENTURE BACK.
BUT MAYOR BURCH BELIEVES THE
AMENITIES WON'T MASK THE
GOVERNMENT'S MESSAGE, DON'T COME
BACK.
>> THEY ARE PROBABLY SLEEPING IN
THE BEST BED THEY'VE EVER SLEPT
IN, AND THESE ARE JUST PLAIN
BUNK BEDS.
THEY'RE PROBABLY EATING THE
BEST, OR THE MOST NUTRITIOUS
FOOD THEY'VE EVER EATEN.
SO, FROM THAT STANDPOINT YOU
COULD SAY, "YEAH, THEY'LL GO
HOME AND THEY'LL COME BACK TO BE
IN THE ARTESIA HILTON," WELL,
THE MESSAGE THEY'RE GOING TO BE
SENT HOME WITH IS DON'T GO,
BECAUSE YOU'RE GOING TO BE
DEPORTED.
>> Reporter: UNLIKE MURRIETTA,
CALIFORNIA, WHERE JEERING CROWDS
OF PROTESTERS TURNED BACK BUSES
OF UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS
HEADED FOR A PROCESSING CENTER,
HERE, THE REACTION HAS BEEN MORE
MUTED.
400 PEOPLE SHOWED UP AT A TOWN
HALL EARLIER THIS MONTH.
MANY VOICED CONCERNS ABOUT
HEALTH PROBLEMS AND OTHER
ISSUES.
THE MAYOR BELIEVES THE
IMMIGRANTS WILL GET THE MESSAGE,
DON'T RETURN.
BUT IN DOWNTOWN ARTESIA WE HEARD
WORRIES ABOUT PROBLEMS THAT MAY
ARISE, NO MATTER HOW LONG THE
IMMIGRANTS ARE DETAINED HERE.
LORI DUDEK USED TO WORK AT THE
TRAINING CENTER.
>> I KNOW THEY HAVE A PROBLEM
WITH THEM BRINGING IN DISEASES
AND LICE AND ALL KINDS OF OTHER
THINGS AND WORKERS ARE GETTING
SICK.
>> Reporter: BUT A DOCTOR AT THE
CENTER SAID THE CHILDREN ONLY
HAVE ILLNESSES COMMON TO U.S.
DAYCARE CENTERS.
AT THE LOCAL WAL-MART, TITA
HARRIS SAID HER WORRY IS THE
SAFETY OF HER COMMUNITY.
>> THIS IS THE THING, THEY KEEP
SAYING THEY CAN KEEP THEM IN
THAT COMPOUND BUT THEY ESCAPED
THEIR COUNTRY, A FENCE IS NOT
GOING TO KEEP THEM IN IF THEY
WANT TO GET OUT TO ME THAT IS
COMMON SENSE.
>> FOR THE FIRST QUARTER OF THE
YEAR HERE IN ARTESIA OVER 70% OF
OUR CRIME WAS GRAFFITI.
>> Reporter: VIOLENT CRIME ISN'T
COMMON IN THIS SMALL TOWN, SAYS
POLICE CHIEF DON RALEY,
AND HE'S NOT WORRIED ABOUT
ESCAPEES FROM THE DETENTION
CENTER.
>> MOMMAS DON'T LEAVE BABIES,
AND BABIES DON'T WANT TO BE LEFT
WITHOUT MOMMAS, SO BECAUSE OF
THE NATURE OF THE POPULATION OUR
ESCAPE CONCERN IS SIGNIFICANTLY
LESS THAN IT MIGHT BE IF WE HAD
A MIXED POPULATION.
WE KIND OF JOKED ABOUT THE
ESCAPE FLIER RESEMBLING A FAMILY
OF DUCKS OR QUAILS CROSSING THE
ROAD WITH MOMMA IN THE FRONT,
AND THREE OR FOUR LITTLE BABIES
BEHIND, AND BECAUSE THEY ARE SO
FOCUSED AS FAMILY UNITS, AND IF
YOU GO INTO THE FACILITY, AND
YOU SEE THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
INSIDE THERE, THEY'RE VERY
FOCUSED AS FAMILY UNITS.
>> Reporter: HERE AND ELSEWHERE,
THERE IS COMPASSION, ESPECIALLY
FOR THE CHILDREN.
ARTESIA'S POPULATION IS HALF
HISPANIC.
MANY ARE IMMIGRANTS THEMSELVES.
TONY ESTRADA THINKS THE CENTER
IS A GOOD THING.
>> I THINK IT'S OKAY BECAUSE I
THINK THAT EVERYBODY DESERVES A
CHANCE, IT'S LIKE EVERYBODY
SAYS, WE ARE DOING IT FOR THE
CHILDREN, THEY ARE THE ONES WHO
ARE GETTING HURT, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: VICKY AND RAMON
CALDERON HAVE LIVED IN MEXICO,
AND UNDERSTAND POVERTY.
>> I FEEL FOR THESE LADIES,
THESE CHILDREN, THEY DESERVE
HELP, AS MUCH AS WE CAN GIVE, WE
HELP EVERYBODY.
WHY CAN'T WE HELP THESE PEOPLE
SEEKING REFUGE?
>> Reporter: MANY IN THE TOWN OF
11,000 HAVE TRIED TO HELP.
HAYLEY KLEIN IS EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF THE CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE.
>> IN A WAY I HAVE BEEN
SURPRISED.
WE TEND TO TAKE CARE OF OUR OWN
IN THIS COMMUNITY, BUT THEY
HAVE, THERE'S BEEN A VERY STRONG
OUTPOURING OF CONCERN FOR THE
INNOCENT VICTIMS.
DONATIONS HAVE POURED IN, AND
PILED UP AT THE CHAMBER'S
OFFICE.
>> FOLKS HAVE TRIED TO DONATE
ALL KINDS OF THINGS, FROM
FORMULA, TO DIAPERS, CLOTHES,
SHOES, BUT REALLY WHAT THEY ARE
ACCEPTING ARE CLOTHES, SHOES FOR
WOMEN AND CHILDREN, TOYS, ART
SUPPLIES, COLORING BOOKS,
CRAYONS, AND BOOKS, READING
BOOKS, PREFERABLY IN SPANISH,
THOSE ARE THE THINGS THAT THEY
WILL TAKE.
>> Reporter: STILL, FOR  MANY
WHO LIVE AND WORK HERE, THE
ISSUE IS FAR LARGER THAN THE
DETENTION CENTER, IT'S ABOUT
IMMIGRATION POLICY DETERMINED
1,800 MILES AWAY IN WASHINGTON,
SAYS OIL INDUSTRY WORKER RANDY
RAY.
>> THERE HAS TO BE A POINT WHERE
WE SAY, THIS IS ENOUGH, WE HAVE
TO STOP AND WE HAVE TO SECURE
OUR BORDERS.
THEN WE DEAL WITH IT AT THE
BORDER ITSELF.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, THE
FLOOD OF IMMIGRANTS CONTINUES.
ABOUT 40 PEOPLE FROM ARTESIA
WERE FLOWN BACK TO HONDURAS ON
MONDAY.
OFFICIALS EXPECT MORE TO BE
DEPORTED IN THE COMING DAYS AND
WEEKS, AND NEW BUSLOADS OF
IMMIGRANTS TO ARRIVE HERE.
>> Woodruff: NOW, TO A SERIES OF
ALARMING SAFETY LAPSES AT THE
FEDERAL CENTERS FOR DISEASE
CONTROL.
NO ONE'S BEEN HURT, BUT THEY'VE
RAISED SERIOUS QUESTIONS.
AND TODAY, THE HEAD OF THE
C.D.C. TRAVELED TO CAPITOL HILL
TO ADDRESS THEM.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS THE STORY.
>> WHAT WE HAVE HERE IS A
PATTERN OF REOCCURRING ISSUES OF
COMPLACENCY AND A LAX CULTURE OF
SAFETY.
THIS IS NOT SOUND SCIENCE AND
THIS WILL NOT BE TOLERATED.
>> Reporter: REVELATIONS OF
SAFETY AND SECURITY PROBLEMS PUT
DR. THOMAS FRIEDEN UNDER THE
MICROSCOPE AT A HOUSE HEARING.
THE HEAD OF THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL WAS CALLED TO
ACCOUNT AFTER MORE THAN 80
C.D.C. LAB WORKERS WERE EXPOSED
TO LIVE STRAINS OF ANTHRAX LAST
MONTH, IN ATLANTA.
THE AGENCY HAS ALSO ACKNOWLEDGED
THAT IT MISTAKENLY SHIPPED THE
AVIAN FLU VIRUS TO OUTSIDE LABS.
SEPARATELY, SEVERAL 60-YEAR-OLD
VIALS OF SMALL POX, SOME WITH
STILL VIABLE STRAINS, WERE
FOUND AT THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES
OF HEALTH IN BETHESDA, MARYLAND.
NO ONE WAS SICKENED IN THE
INCIDENTS, BUT, FRIEDEN
CONCEDED:
>> THE FACT THAT NO ONE WAS
HARMED DOES NOT MEAN IT IS
ACCEPTABLE.
IT SHOULD NEVER HAVE HAPPENED.
>> Reporter: LAWMAKERS POINTED
TO A PATTERN OF DISTURBING
INCIDENTS, AND TO C.D.C.'S
FAILURE TO REPORT THEM BEFORE
NOW.
THE HOUSE PANEL FOUND THAT
FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HAVE
DOCUMENTED DOZENS OF OTHER
SAFETY VIOLATIONS AT
C.D.C. FACILITIES IN ATLANTA.
AMONG THEM:
STORING ANTHRAX IN UNLOCKED
REFRIGERATORS.
ALLOWING UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS TO
LABS.
FAILING TO DOCUMENT THAT STAFF
WERE PROPERLY TRAINED.
AND, EVEN, TRANSFERRING GERM
MATERIALS IN ZIPLOC PLASTIC
BAGS.
>> I THINK THAT WHILE WE HAVE
SCIENTISTS WHO ARE THE BEST IN
THE WORLD AT WHAT THEY DO, THEY
HAVE NOT ALWAYS APPLIED THAT
SAME RIGOR THAT THEY DO TO THEIR
SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS TO
IMPROVING SAFETY.
AND THAT'S WHY WE'RE TAKING A
NUMBER OF STEPS TO STRENGTHEN
THE CULTURE OF SAFETY AT C.D.C.
>> Reporter: BUT FRIEDEN'S
ADMISSION FAILED TO SATISFY
COMMITTEE MEMBERS FROM EITHER
PARTY, INCLUDING PENNSYLVANIA
REPUBLICAN TIM MURPHY.
>> I HAVE TO THINK WHAT I
HEAVEN'S NAME WOULD GO THROUGH
THE MINDS OF SCIENTISTS THINKING
A ZIPLOC BAG IS ENOUGH TO
PROTECT SOMEONE FROM ANTHRAX.
>> ONCE THE LABORATORY HAD SAID
HERE IS KILLED ANTHRAX IT WAS
HANDLED BY THE STAFF IN THOSE
LOWER CONTAINMENT LABORATORIES
AS IF IT WERE NOT INFECTIOUS.
>> BUT DR. FRIEDEN THIS IS LIKE
SAYING, I DIDN'T KNOW THE GUN
WAS LOADED.
BUT SOMEBODY GOT SHOT.
BUT YOU SHOULD ALWAYS ASSUME IT
IS, FOR SOMEONE TO SAY WELL I
DIDN'T THINK THE ANTHRAX WAS
LIVE IS UNACCEPTABLE.
>> Reporter: COLORADO DEMOCRAT
DIANA DEGETTE SUGGESTED THERE'S
A MORE OVERARCHING PROBLEM, LACK
OF OVERSIGHT.
>> DR. FRIEDEN HAS INDICATED
THAT HE WAS AS SURPRISED AS
ANYBODY BY THE SCOPE OF THE
PROBLEMS.
AND THE FACT, DR. FRIEDEN, YOU
WERE SO SURPRISED IS A PROBLEM
IN AND OF ITSELF BECAUSE WHAT IT
SHOWS IS THAT THERE IS A
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM WITH THE
CULTURE OF IDENTIFYING AND
REPORTING SAFETY PROBLEMS UP THE
CHAIN OF THE COMMAND.
THE C.D.C. HAS NOW CLOSED TWO
LABS TIED TO THE ANTHRAX EPISODE
UNTIL SAFETY PROTOCOLS ARE
REVIEWED.
FRIEDEN SAID HE'S NAMING AN
OUTSIDE ADVISORY GROUP TO REVAMP
THOSE RULES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALEX WAYNE OF
BLOOMBERG NEWS WAS AT TODAY'S
HEARING AND HE JOINS ME NOW.
SO LET'S TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
SOME OF THESE INCIDENTS THAT
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WERE SO
HEATED ABOUT.
FIRST THE ANTHRAX ONE WE LEARNED
ABOUT IN FULL JUST LAST WEEK.
>> RIGHT.
SO IN EARLY JUNE, SOME
SCIENTISTS AT A VERY HIGH-LEVEL
LAB OF THE C.D.C. CALLED THE
BIOTERROR RAPID RESPONSE AND
ADVANCE TECHNOLOGY LAB WERE
PREPARING AN EXPERIMENT USING
ANTHRAX.
THEY THOUGHT THEY STERILIZED THE
ANTHRAX BEFORE SENDING IT TO A
LOWER SECURITY LAB BUT TURNED
OUT THEY HADN'T AND THEY ONLY
DISCOVERED THIS EIGHT OR NINE
DAYS AFTER THEY SENT THE ANTHRAX
TO THIS LABORATORY.
SO THAT RAISED THE PROCESS SOME
WORKERS WERE EXPOSED TO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: FRIEDEN SAID
HE WAS MORE CONCERNED ABOUT THE
INCIDENT WITH THE AVIAN FLU.
WHY?
>> TWO PRIORS THERE -- ONE, THEY
DIDN'T FIND OUT TILL MONTHS
AFTER THE INCIDENT HAPPENED AND,
TWO, THIS STRAIN OF AVIAN FLU IS
VERY DANGEROUS.
I BELIEVE IT'S LETHAL IN ABOUT
50% OF THE PEOPLE WHO CONTRACT
IT, AS OPPOSED TO ANTHRAX, WHICH
IS ALSO DANGEROUS IF YOU'RE
INFECTED BUT IT CAN BE TREATED
WITH ANTIBIOTICS AND YOU ALSO
CAN'T TRANSMIT IT TO ANYBODY
ELSE.
I THINK THAT'S REALLY ONE OF THE
OVERRIDING CONCERNS HERE WITH
THIS ANTHRAX INCIDENT.
IT'S NOT SO MUCH THAT ANTHRAX
GOT LOOSE IN THE C.D.C. LABS,
IT'S WHAT ELSE MIGHT GET LOOSE
THAT'S MORE DANGEROUS, BUT WHAT
COULD A C.D.C. WORKER BECOME
INFECTED WITH, THEN LEAVE, GO
HOME, TRANSMIT TO ITS FAMILY,
NEIGHBORS, ALL OF A SUDDEN YOU
HAVE A PUBLICHEALTH EMERGENCY,
NOT JUST WITHIN THE WALLS TO
HAVE THE C.D.C.
>> Sreenivasan: SO YOU
WITNESSED SOMETHING THAT'S
BECOMING INCREASINGLY RARE IN
WASHINGTON, BIPARTISAN
AGREEMENT, AT LEAST ON A LEVEL
OF FRUSTRATION TOWARD THE C.D.C.
>> RIGHT.
WHAT CONCERNED LAWMAKERS WAS
THOMAS FRIEDEN, DIRECTOR OF THE
C.D.C., SEEMED TO BE SURPRISED
ABOUT THE INCIDENTS AND SAID IT
WAS A WAKEUP CALL FOR HIS
AGENCY, EVEN THOUGH THERE HAVE
BEEN NUMEROUS INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTS OVER THE LAST THREE OR
FOUR YEARS POINTING OUT SAFETY
VIOLATIONS AND POOR PROCEDURES
IN THE C.D.C. LABS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES THE
C.D.C. SAY IT WILL DO AND HOW
WILL IT BE DIFFERENT THAN THE
TIMES BEFORE?
>> WELL, THIS TIME, THEY'VE
TAKEN CONCRETE STEPS TO CONTROL
THIS RESEARCH AT LEAST IN THE
SHORT TERM THAT CLOSED THIS
BIOTERROR LAB THAT MISHANDLED
THE ANTHRAX AND IT'S GOING TO BE
CLOSED I DEFINITELY TILL THEY
PUT IN BETTER PROCEDURES TO
HANDLE THIS MATERIAL BUT, ALSO,
FOR NOW, IMPOSE A MORATORIUM ON
TRANSFERRING THESE VERY
DANGEROUS PATHOGENS BETWEEN LABS
WITHIN C.D.C. OR SHIPPING THEM
TO LABS AROUND THE COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS MIGHT BE
A RUDIMENTARY QUESTION, BUT WHAT
DOES THE C.D.C. SAY IS THE NEED
TO HAVE MULTIPLE LOCATIONS
AROUND THE COUNTRY DEALING WITH
SUCH INCREDIBLY POWERFUL LIVE
AGENTS?
>> WELL, THERE ARE REALLY A
COUPLE OF DIFFERENT AGENCIES
WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT THAT STUDY
THESE THINGS, NOT JUST THE
C.D.C., THE DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE AND THE DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT.
THEY DON'T ALL HAVE THE
FACILITIES CONCENTRATED IN
ATLANTA.
THE USDA HAS FACILITIES
ELSEWHERE IN THE COUNTRY AS DOES
THE DEFENSE DEPARTMENT.
ALSO UNIVERSITIES OFTEN OPERATE
FAIRLY HIGH SECURITY LABS, NOT
TO THE LEVEL OF THE C.D.C.'S,
BUT CERTAINLY SECURE, AND THEY
LIKE TO HAVE THEIR OWN MATERIAL
ON HAND TO PERFORM THEIR
RESEARCH.
>> Sreenivas:  T
THEY'VE CLOSED OFF THESE
SPECIFIC LABS, ARE THERE
DIFFERENT PROTOCOLS THE C.D.C.
SAYS IT CAN PUT INTO PLACE TO
PREVENT THIS FROM EVER HAPPENING
AGAIN?
>> REALLY WHAT'S AN ISSUE HERE
IS ENSURING SCIENTISTS FOLLOW
THE PROTOCOLS ALREADY IN PLACE.
THE REPORTS THAT CONGRESS HAS
MADE PUBLIC THIS WEEK REVEAL
THAT THE C.D.C. WORKERS WERE
SIMPLY IGNORING PROCEDURES THAT
MAKE A LOT OF COMMON SENSE.
FOR EXAMPLE, THEY WERE
TRANSFERRING ANTHRAX BETWEEN
LABS AND ZIP LOCK BAGS.
THEY WERE STORING ANTHRAX IN
UNLOCKED REFRIGERATORS AND
UNRESTRICTED HALLWAYS.
THEY LOCK THE REFRIGERATORS.
IF THEY HANDLE THE ANTHRAX A
LITTLE MORE CAREFULLY, I BELIEVE
THE C.D.C. BELIEVES THEY CAN
STOP THIS THING FROM HAPPENING
IN THE FUTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: SEEMS LIKE
MORE OF A CULTURE PROBLEM, ONE
OF THE THINGS PEOPLE IN REPORTS
SAY PEOPLE WOULD PIGGY BAG IN
SECURE AREAS, WHERE ONE PERSON
USES THE PASS AND THE OTHER
WALKS IN.
HOW DO YOU CHANGE THAT BEHAVIOR?
>> I'M SURE IT'S TOUGH.
YOU COULD START BY CHANGING
LEADERSHIP AT THE C.D.C., I
SUPPOSE.
NOBODY AT THESE HEARINGS CALLED
FOR DR. FRIEDEN TO RESIGN, BUT,
APPARENTLY, HE SAID THERE
SEEMS -- HE HAS TO IMPOSE SOME
SORT OF A CULTURE CHANGE.
I THINK WHAT HAPPENS IS SORT OF
LIKE IN ANY WORKPLACE, YOU GET
COMFORTABLE WITH YOUR JOB, YOU
THINK YOU KNOW WHAT YOU'RE DOING
AND, SO, YOU CUT CORNERS AND
START PIGGY BACKING ON SECURITY
CARDS, YOU MAYBE USE A TORN
GLOVE WHEN YOU KNOW WHAT YOU'RE
HANDLING, PERHAPS, ISN'T ALL
THAT DANGEROUS TO YOU
PERSONALLY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALEX WAYNE OF
BLOOMBERG NEWS, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> SURE.
THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT,
ENTICING A NEW GENERATION TO
JOIN THE PEACE CORPS.
53 YEARS AGO, PRESIDENT KENNEDY
CREATED THE ALL-VOLUNTEER CORPS,
WHICH HAS SINCE SENT MORE THAN
200,000 U.S. CITIZENS TO 139
COUNTRIES.
TODAY, THERE ARE ABOUT 7,000
VOLUNTEERS SERVING IN 65
COUNTRIES, TEACHING, WORKING IN
AGRICULTURE AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT, AND PROMOTING
NUTRITION AND PUBLIC HEALTH.
BUT THE PEACE CORPS HAS BEEN ON
THE DECLINE, AS FEWER PEOPLE
APPLY, AND WAIT TIMES FOR
ACCEPTANCE INCREASE.
YESTERDAY, THE CORPS ANNOUNCED
PLANS TO REVERSE THAT TREND.
DIRECTOR CARRIE HESSLER-RADELET
JOINS ME NOW.
>> THANK YOU.
IT'S A PRIVILEGE TO BE HERE.
>> Ifill: TELL ME, 53 YEARS,
WHAT ARE THE CHANGES YOU'VE
ANNOUNCED?
>> WE ACTUALLY STARTED THIS FOUR
YEARS AGO AS PART OF A PLANNED
REFORM TO UPGRADE ALL ASPECTS OF
OUR OPERATIONS AND REALLY
MODERNIZE THE PEACE CORPS.
WE FOCUSED THE FIRST FOUR YEARS
ON IMPROVING SUPPORT WE PROVIDE
TO VOLUNTEERS -- SO HEALTH,
SAFETY, TECHNICAL AND PROGRAM
SUPPORT SO THEY CAN DO THEIR
JOBS EFFECTIVELY.
SO WE STRENGTHEN OUR BASE FIRST,
AND NOW WE'RE READY TO RAMP UP
OUR APPLICATION NUMBERS.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT THE
APPLICATION NUMBERS.
I READ TODAY THERE WERE 30,000
INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS MADE IN
NINE MONTHS.
WHY WERE THE APPLICATIONS NOT
COMPLETED?
>> THE FORMER PROCESS WAS
CUMBERSOME AND LONG.
IT USED TO TAKE EIGHT HOURS TO
APPLY FOR THE PEACE CORPS.
>> Ifill: EIGHT HOURS?
F YOU PRINTED IT OUT, IT
WOULD BE 60 PAGES.
NOW WE HAVE A PROCESS THAT TAKES
LESS THAN ONE HOUR TO COMPLETE.
IT'S MUCH MORE USER FRIENDLY,
FASTER, EASIER AND MORE
PERSONALIZED.
>> Ifill: SO THE DESIRE TO BE
AN INTERNATIONAL VOLUNTEER STILL
EXISTS?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
ABSOLUTELY.
>> Ifill: JUST THE PROCESS
NEEDED TO BE FIXED?
>> I THINK THE PROCESS NEEDED TO
BE FIXED, ABSOLUTELY.
>> Ifill: DOES IT CHANGE WHERE
PEOPLE GET TO GO, THE PROCESS?
>> Ifill: THE THREE CHANGES
WE'VE ANNOUNCED TODAY, OUR FIRST
POSSIBILITY OF CHOICE, OUR
VOLUNTEERS HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY
TO APPLY FOR A PARTICULAR
COUNTRY AND A PARTICULAR
PROGRAM, AND THAT'S A BIG CHANGE
FOR US.
>> Ifill: A BLIND APPLICATION
BEFORE?
>> YES, YOU APPLY TO THE PEACE
CORPS AND YOU GO WE WE NEED YOU.
YOU STILL HAVE THE OPTION TO
CHOOSE I'LL SERVE WHEREVER
NEEDED.
FRANKLY, WE'RE FINDING ALMOST
ALL OUR APPLICANTS, EVEN SINCE
WE ANNOUNCED THE CHANGES, ARE
STILL PUSHING THAT BUTTON, ARE
STILL SELECTING THEY ARE WILLING
TO GO WHEREVER NEEDED.
>> Ifill: DO YOU HAVE A BACKUP
PLAN IN CASE EVERYBODY WANTS TO
GO TO FRANCE?
>> WE DON'T SERVE IN FRANCE, BUT
THERE ARE COUNTRIES THAT WILL BE
MORE COMPETITIVE, ABSOLUTELY.
IT'S A COMPETITIVE PROCESS.
IT'S GOING TO BE LIKE APPLYING
TO A UNIVERSITY.
>> Ifill: THAT'S THE FIRST
DIFFERENCE.
THE SECOND IS WE'RE HAVING THE
SHORTER APPLICATION WE JUST
TALKED ABOUT.
THE THIRD IS, NOW, WE HAVE
INCREASED THE TRANSPARENCY.
SO IF YOU APPLY FOR A PARTICULAR
PROGRAM, YOU WILL KNOW WHEN YOU
WILL FIND OUT WHETHER OR NOT YOU
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED AND YOU'LL
KNOW WHAT DATE YOU DEPART.
SO IT'S JUST LIKE APPLYING FOR A
JOB OR UNIVERSITY, YOU WILL HAVE
CLARITY AROUND YOUR DATES AND
PLAN AROUND YOUR PEACE CORPS
SERVICE.
>> Ifill: YOU'VE I HAD THE
PEACE CORPS IS A GREAT BRAND.
WHAT IS THE BRAND AND WHO IS
STILL APPLYING TO GO ABROAD?
>> YOU KNOW, OUR VOLUNTEERS ARE
OF ALL AGES.
OUR YOUNGEST VOLUNTEER 21, OUR
OLDEST VOLUNTEER IS 80, AND WE
REPRESENT THE DIVERSITY OF OUR
COUNTRY, AND HAVING A VOLUNTEER
FORCE THAT REFLECTS THE RICH
DIVERSITY OF OUR COUNTRY IS A
VERY IMPORTANT PRIORITY.
>> Ifill: DOES IT TRULY
REFLECT THE DIVERSITY?
>> NOT COMPLETELY.
ABOUT 20% SELF-REPORT AS
MINORITY, BUT IT IS A HIGH
PRIORITY FOR US THAT WE HAVE A
VOLUNTEER FORCE THAT REFLECTS
THE RICH DIVERSITY OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> Ifill: HOW DO YOU GO ABOUT
DOING THAT?
>> PARTNERSHIPS WITH
HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES, HISPANIC SERVINGS
INSTITUTIONS, TRAVEL TO COLLEGES
AND UNIVERSITIES, AARP BECAUSE
WE WANT DIVERSITY IN AGE AS
WELL, AND THEN WE HAVE
PARTNERSHIPS WITH ORGANIZATIONS
THAT REACH OUT TO UNDERSERVED
POPULATIONS.
>> Ifill: YOU'VE ALSO HAD A
CHANGE TO RESPOND TO THE TIMES,
THE PEACE CORPS CAME UNDER
SCRUTINY FOR SEXUAL ASSAULT IN
SOME LOCATIONS AND ALSO HAVE TO
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE RISE OF
SAME-SEX COUPLES WHO WANT TO
SERVE TOGETHER.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THE WHOLE ISSUE OF SAFETY AND
SECURITY IS A VERY HIGH PRIORITY
FOR ME PERSONALLY AS A MOTHER,
AS A RETURN PEACE CORPS
VOLUNTEER MYSELF, A AS PUBLIC
HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AND A SEXUAL
ASSAULT SURVIVOR, IT IS AN AREA
I FEEL VERY STRONGLY ABOUT AND
WE'VE DONE SO MUCH OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS TO IMPROVE THE QUALITY
OF OUR SUPPORT TO VOLUNTEERS AND
THE RESPONSE THAT WE PROVIDE.
>> Ifill: AS A FORMER
VOLUNTEER YOURSELF, WHEN YOU
LOOK AT THE PEOPLE WHO COME AND
SAY THEY WANT TO APPLY, AND EVEN
WHEN THEY WERE FILLING OUT 80
PAGES WORTH OF APPLICATIONS TO
DO IT, HOW HAS THE VOLUNTEER
FORCE CHANGED?